Group Project Instructions:

Create your data-driven story

Scenario

You are a team of experts that provide data-driven advice to managers and CEOs to inform

their business strategy.

The CEO of a company which owns a chain of shops approaches your team. The shops sell

various categories of products. The CEO asks you to generate a data-driven business report

for the enterprise’s performance over the last few years. The purpose of this report is to gain

insight and thus provide valuable knowledge for better decision making. The information

arising from the available data will contribute to the company’s business strategy, thus

expert visualizations of data are of the utmost importance.

For this Group Project, your team will use two datasets: the first dataset contains the shop’s

performance (sales, profits, salespersons etc.) and the second the product returns for the

years 2012-2015.

To prepare for this Group Project:

· Download the datasets at

https://www.tableau.com/sites/default/files/getting_started_data_sets.zip

By Day 7 (Sunday) of Week 13

Using the datasets, submit a business report which addresses the following:

1. The CEO wishes to see information about the profits and sales per product category

during the last three years. Therefore, create effective visuals that present the sales

per product category and the profits per product category for the last three years.

2. Make clear which countries are the most profitable for the company and the profits

per product category. In addition, the CEO wants to see the products sales with the

least sales for some product categories, thus find out the countries with the lowest

level of sales during the last three years.

3. As the company wants to provide a bonus for the top salespeople, find the people

with the higher profits and sales during the last five years and depict their

performance per product category.

4. Discuss the number of returns compared with number of sales orders for the last

three years.

5. Create a data-driven story providing the key points of the company during the last

three years and make suggestions about future actions. If you wish you can also use

other data from open data sources to strengthen your recommendations.

6. Identify trends of profits per category and segment over time. Describe the trend lines

model and discuss the results of your analysis.

7. Forecast how sales and profits will be evolved in the following year (2016).

8. Complete the business report by adding an introduction plus sections for methods,

conclusions and references. Ensure all your visualizations are clear and

understandable, and your recommendations are supported by available data.

You have 3 weeks to complete this project. As a suggestion, you should complete tasks 1-2

in Week 11, tasks 3-5 in Week 12 and the remaining tasks in Week 13.

By Week 13, submit your group’s completed final report which includes screenshots of the

data visualizations.